>>> ON THIS EDITION FO
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 5th, THE
LATEST MOVES TO END TH
GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN.
WHAT WILL THE PRESIDENT AN
SPEAKER BOEHNER DO NEXT?
THE OBSCURE TASK FORCE THA
DECIDES IF YOU GET MEDICAL
SCREENINGS FOR FREE.
>> WE WANT TO BE INDEPENDENT AND
WE WANT OUR RECOMMENDATIONS TO
BE BASED ON SCIENCE NO
POLITICS
>>> AND FROM THE CONGO TO YOUR
CELL PHONE
NEXT ON PBS NEWS HOUR WEEKEND.
VOTED 407 TO NOTHING TO GRARNT
BACK PAY TO 800,000 FEDERA
EMPLOYEES NOW FURLOUGHED
THE SENATE ALSO IS EXPECTED TO
APPROVE THE LEGISLATION.
IN A SEPARATE DEVELOPMENT, CHUCK
HAGEL SAID THE PENTAGON IS
ORDERING MOST OF ITS FURLOUGHE
CIVILIAN EMPLOYEES BACK TO WORK,
HE DID NOT SAY EXACTLY HOW MANY.
MEANWHILE, THERE ARE NEW SIGNS
THE GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN IS
DAMAGING THE ECONOMY, THOUSAND
OF HOME BUYERS MAY NOT BE ABLE
TO QUALIFY FOR MORTGAGES BECAUSE
OF THE FURLOUGHING OF IR
WORKERS.
THE IRS OFTEN VERIFIES THE
INCOME OF HOME BUYERS TRYING T
GET A LOAN
FOR WEEKS NOW, WASHINGTO
WATCHERS HAVE BEEN SAYIN
RESOLUTION OF THE CONFLICT WIL
HINGE ON THE ACTIONS OF TWO MEN,
PRESIDENT OBAMA AND HOUS
SPEAKER JOHN BOEHNER
WE'LL HAVE TWO CONVERSATIONS
WITH THE REPORTERS WHO COVER
EACH OF THEM
FOR MORE, WE'RE JOINED BY JANE
HOOK OF THE WALL STREET JOURNAL,
I HAVE TO ASK, DOES THIS
MORNING'S UNANIMOUS AGREEMENT TO
GIVE FEDERAL WORKERS WHO WER
FURLOUGHED BACK PAY, IF THAT'S
APPROVED BY THE SENATE AND THE
WHITE HOUSE DOES, THAT BUY JOH
BOEHNER MORE TIME OR INCREAS
THE PRESSURE ON MINIMUM?
>> I HAVE TO SAY, THAT UNANIMOUS
VOTE IS REALLY AN ILLUSION
IT'S THE ONE THING PEOPLE CA
AGREE ON, IS THAT THEY DON'T
WANT TO TAKE THIS OUT ON THE
FEDERAL WORKERS WHO ARE MISSIN
DAYS AND DAYS OF PAYCHECKS
I THINK ACTUALLY, IT KIND OF
LIFTS THE PRESSURE ON CONGRESS
TO COME TO ANY KIND OF
AGREEMENT, BECAUSE THERE ISN'T
PRESSURE COMING FROM FEDERAL
WORKERS WHO ARE WANTING TO GET
THEIR PAYCHECK, THEY KNO
THEY'LL BE MADE WHOLE IN THE
END.
>> WHAT'S THE LIKELIHOOD I
SPEAKER BOEHNER COMBINES THI
NEGOTIATION INTO THE DEB
CEILING CONVERSATION THAT'
LOOMING.
>> PRESIDENT OBAMA LAST WEEK WAS
GIVING SPEECHES WHERE HE WAS
CALLING OUT SPEAKER BOEHNER AN
BASICALLY SAYING HE WAS ALMOST
SINGLE HANDEDLY RESPONSIBLE FO
THE SHUTDOWN
SPEAKER BOEHNER HAS BEEN HAR MUC
IN RETURN QUESTIONING PRESIDEN
OBAMA'S LEADERSHIP
A COUPLE WEEKS AGO, I THEIR THEY
PLAYED GOLF TOGETHER AND THE
WERE TRYING TO GET SOM
NEGOTIATIONS TOGETHER.
RIGHT NOW IT'S DIFFICULT T
THINK OF THEM OUT ON THE LINKS
TOGETHER
>> JULIE PACE IS A WHITE HOUSE
CORRESPONDENT FOR THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS, SHE HAD AN EXCLUSIV
INTERVIEW WITH THE PRESIDENT
YESTERDAY.
WE JUST HEARD JANET HOOK SAY THE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SPEAKER
BOEHNER AND THE PRESIDENT IS
ALMOST NONEXISTENT
YOU SAT DOWN WITH THE PRESIDEN
YESTERDAY, THAT SEEMED NAR
ACCURATE
>> YES, IT'S DEFINITEL
THESE ARE TWO MEN WHO TRIED TO
BUILD A RELATIONSHIP BACK IN
2011, THEY REALLY FOUND THAT
THEY EITHER COULDN'T TRUST EAC
OTHER OR DIDN'T HAVE A LOT O
OVERLAPPING POSITIONS.
AND THE RELATIONSHIP HAS GOTTE
WORSE OVER TIME.
THEY SAY THEY DON'T SPEAK VERY
OFTEN, THEY DON'T NECESSARIL
NOT LIKE EACH OTHER, THEY JUST
DON'T HAVE ANYTHING IN COMMON.
AND I THINK THAT'S PLAYING OUT
IN THIS DEBELATE
YOU DON'T SEE A LOT OF
INVITATIONS FOR JOHN BOEHNER T
COME OVER TO THE WHITE HOUSE
YOU DON'T SEE A LOT OF PHONE
CALLS BEING TRADED BY THE TW
MEN.
>> YOU'VE COVERED THE PRESIDEN
SINCE BEFORE HE WAS PRESIDENT.
NOW, IN THIS PARTICULAR CRISIS
HOW DOES HE SEEM TO YOU?
>> ONE OF THE THINGS I WAS
STRUCK BY IN THE INTERVIEW W
HAD WITH HIM, IS HOW OFD H
SEEMS.
THE WHITE HOUSE FEELS LIKE, IN
TERMS OF THE GOVERNMEN
SHUTDOWN, THEY'RE REALLY WINNING
THE POLITICS OF THIS, AND TH
PRESIDENT SEEMS TO REALLY SKEWED
THIS CONFIDENCE.
HE WAS HOLDING FIRM ON HIS
POSITIONS, MAKING CLEAR THAT H
WAS NOT GOING TO NEGOTIATE AWA
TO THE GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN
WHAT I THINK IS PARTICULARLY
STRIKING, IS THAT JUST A FEW
WEEKS AGO, THIS WAS A PRESIDEN
WHO WAS REALLY IN CRISIS 37
DON'T THINK THAT'S OVERSTATING
IT, YOU HAD HIS DECISION O
SYRIA, YOU HAD THE NSA
REVELATIONS, GOING BACK EARLIE
IN THE SUMMER.
YOU HAD CONTROVERIES IN THE IR
THAT WERE BUBBLING UP.
THAT HAS BEEN OVERSHADOWED B
THE DEBACLE IN CAPITOL HILL OVER
THE GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN, AND
IT'S REALLY RENEWED HI
CONFIDENCE GOING INTO THE END OF
THIS YEAR.
>> DOES HE THINK THIS WILL GET
TIED INTO THE CONVERSATION ABOUT
THE DEBT CELLING
>> SO I ASKED HIM ABOUT THIS, HE
SAID THAT THAT SHOULDN'T HAPPEN,
THAT THE HOUSE SHOULD BE ABLE TO
RESOLVE THIS BEFORE WE GET T
THE DEBT CEILING DEADLINE, WHICH
IS ABOUT OCTOBER 17th, I THINK
REALISTICALLY, THERE'S A GOO
CHANCE THAT WILL HAPPEN.
YOU HEAR FROM SOME REPUBLICANS
ON CAPITOL HILL, THAT IT MAY B
IN SPEAKER BOEHNER'S FAVOR T
LET THESE TWO DEADLINES MERGE.
I THINK IF YOU CAUGHT SOME WHITE
HOUSE OFFICIALS IN SOME PRIVAT
MOMENTS, THEY MAY ACKNOWLEDG
THE FACT THAT THAT IS WHERE THIS
IS HEADED.
>> I WANT TO ASK YOU ABOUT IRAN.
ISRAEL HAS GONE ON THE RECOR
AND SAID THAT IRAN IS VERY CLOSE
TO A NUCLEAR BOMB.
WHAT'S THE PRESIDENT'S
ASSESSMENT
>> THE PRESIDENT ADMITS THAT THE
U.S. IS A BIT MORE CONSERVATIV
THAN IRAN IN THEIR INTELLIGENC
ASSESSMENT
WHEN I ASKED HIM WHAT TH
CURRENT ASSESSMENT IS, HE SAID
THAT THE U.S. BELIEVES IRAN IS A
YEAR OR MORE AWAY FROM BEING
ABLE TO BUILD A NUCLEAR WEAPON
THIS IS SOMETHING HE'S B
TELLING BENJAMIN NETANYAHU FOR
QUITE SOME TIME, THE ISRAELI
ARE A BIT MORE FORWARD LEANING
ON THEIR TIME FRAME.
WHAT THE PRESIDENT IS TRYING T
DO WHEN HE LAYS OUT THIS LONGE
TIME FRAME IS MAKING THE CAS
FOR DIPLOMACY, SAYING WE HAVE
YEAR OR MORE TO TRY TO LAUNC
THIS DIPLOMATIC EFFORT WITH TH
NEW IRANIAN PRESIDENT.
>> JULIE PACE, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> IN OTHER NEWS, THE GOVERNMENT
WILL TEMPORARILY TAKE DOWN THE
NEWLY LAUNCHED WIB SITE WHER
AMERICANS CAN APPLY FOR MEDICA
INSURANCE.
HEALTHCARE.GOV, IT WILL GO DOW
FOR A FEW HOURS LATE TONIGHT AND
LATE TOMORROW NIGHT.
THERE HAVE BEEN NEARLY 9 MILLION
INDIVIDUAL VISITS TO THE SIT
DURING THE PAST FOUR DAYS.
MANY USERS REPORTED EXPERIENCING
LONG WAITS OR RECEIVING ERRO
MESSAGES
THERE WERE RENEWED CALLS ACROS
THE UNITED STATES TODAY FO
IMMIGRATION REFORM
DEMONSTRATORS MARCHED IN DOZEN
OF CITIES.
LAST JUNE THE SENATE PASSE
ANIBLE GRAGS BILL THAT WOULD
HAVE PUT MANY UNDOCUMENTED
IMMIGRANTS ON THE PAGEANT TO
CITIZENSHIP.
THE BILL HAS GONE NOWHERE IN THE
HOUSE.
OVERSEAS TODAY, IRAN'S SUPREME
LEADER HAS CRITICIZED THAT
NATION'S NEW PRESIDENT A WEE
AFTER HASSAN ROWHANI SPOKE WIT
PRESIDENT OBAMA.
>> WE SUPPORT THE GOVERNMENT'S
DIPLOMATIC MOVEMENTS, AND PLAC
IMPORTANCE ON DIPLOMATIC
EFFORTS.
AND SUPPORT WHAT WAS IN THIS
LAST TRIP.
OF COURSE, IN OUR OPINION, SOM
OF WHAT OCCURRED IN THE NEW YORK
TRIP WAS NOT PROFITABLE.
>> THE AYATOLLAH ALSO EXPRESSE
SKEPTICISM ABOUT THEthNESS O
WASHINGTON TO NEGOTIATE WITH
THEM
CALLING THE U.S. NOT
TRUSTWORTHY.
>>> U.S. NAVY S.E.A.L.s -- A
SHABAAB CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY
FOR A TERROR ATTACK ON A
UPSCALE MALL THAT KILLED DOZEN
OF SHOPPERS LAST MONTH
>>> AND NOW TO OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, WHERE WE TAKE A LOOK AT
IMPORTANT BUT OFTE
UNDERREPORTED ISSUES
TONIGHT WE FOCUS ON A LITTLE
KNOWN PORTION OF THE AFFORDABL
CARE ACT
HOW A ONCE OBSCURE TASK FORC
DECIDES WHICH PREVENTATIVE
SCREENINGS YOUR INSURANC
COMPANY HAS TO COVERER IN FULL
OUR REPORT IS BY DR. EMILY
SINAE.
>> BARBARA HILLARY IS SHOPPING
FOR A COAT THAT WILL KEEP HE
WARM IN SUB-ZERO TEMPERATURES.
>> WHEN I'M ON EXPEDITION, IT'
ALL ABOUT SURVIVAL AND REACHIN
MY GOALS
>> THE 82-YEAR-OLD RETIRED NURSE
IS PLANNING A TRIP TO TH
ARCTIC, AND IT WON'T BE HE
FIRST.
>> I WAS THE FIRST
AFRICAN-AMERICAN WOMAN TO REAC
THE NORTH POLE, SETTING A WORL
RECORD
THE FIRST AFRICAN-AMERICAN WOMAN
TO REACH THE NORTH AND SOUTH
POLE
SETTING ANOTHER WORLD'S RECORD
>> SHE'S BEEN AN ADVENTURER AL
HER LIFE, AND A SMOKER TOO
SHE HAD HER FIRST CIGARETTE WHEN
SHE WAS 19 YEARS OLD AND OVE
THE YEARS SHE SMOKED CLOSE T
TWO PACKS A DAY.
THEN ONE DAY, HILLARY READ ABOUT
A LUNG CANCER SCREENING PROGRA
USING CT SCANS AT A MEDICA
COLLEGE IN NEW YORK CITY
ALWAYS WILLING TO TRY SOMETHIN
NEW, HILLARY DECIDED TO SIGN UP.
>> IT OCCURRED TO ME THAT THIS
IS AN AVENUE THAT I HAD NO
EXPLORED, I WAS A SMOKER, IT WAS
AVAILABLE.
SO WHY NOT TAKE ADVANTAGE OF IT.
>> AND DID YOU HAVE AN
SYMPTOMS
WERE YOU SICK AT THE TIME?
>> NO, I WANE THE.
>> NO COUGH SOMETHING.
>> NO.
>> AS IT TURNED OUT, HER FIRST
SCREENING SHOWED A CANCEROUS
MASS IN HER LUNG AND SHE WOULD
NEED SURGERY
>> HAD YOU NOT BEEN PROACTIVE,
WHAT WOULD HAVE HAPPENED
>> I MIGHT BE DEAD BY NOW.
>> NOW UNDER A LITTLE PUBLICIZED
PART OF THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT,
LONG TIME SMOKERS LIKE HILLARY
MIGHT BE ENTITLED TO A $30
PREVENTATIVE LUNG CANCER
SCREENING WITH NO CO PAY
THAT'S BECAUSE OF AN OBSCURE
GROUP KNOWN AS THE UNITED STATES
PREVENTATIVE SERVICES TASK
FORCE.
IT'S COMPOSED OF 60 VOLUNTEE
AND INDEPENDENT PHYSICIANS AND
ACADEMICS.
THE GROUP CONSIDERS WHAT
SCREENINGS HAVE WORKED AND WHICH
ONES DON'T
ANYONE IN THE MEDICAL FIELD CA
SUBMIT A NOMINATION FOR A SEAT
ON THE TASK FORCE, EVE
SELF-NOMINATIONS ARE ACCEPTED.
MEMBERS ARE EMBEDDED IN SELECTED
AGENCIES WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT
OF HUMAN HEALTH AND SERVICES
THE GROUP WAS LITTLE KNOWN FOR
30 YEARS
USING LETTER GRADES TO MAK
RECOMMENDATIONS TO PRIMARY CAR
PHYSICIANS ON WHICH SERVICES
THEY SHOULD OFFER THEIR PATIENTS
AND HELPING INSURANCE COMPANIE
DECIDE TO COVER.
BEFORE THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT
WAS PASSED IN 2010, A GRADE A OR
B WAS ONLY A RECOMMENDATION.
BUT UNDER THE NEW LAW, A GRADE A
OR B NOW REQUIRES THAT MEDICAR
AND PRIVATE INSURERS PICK UP
100% OF THE COST
>> DR. VIRGINIA MOYER IS THE
CHAIR OF THE TASK FORCE.
>> THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT
INCLUDES A PROVISION THAT SAYS
THAT ANY RECOMMENDATION THAT
RECEIVES AN A OR B GRADE IS PAID
FOR FIRST DOLLAR, SO NO CO PAY
FOR THOSE RECOMMENDATIONS.
>> SINCE THE PASSAGE OF TH
AGORDABLE CARE ACT, THE TASK
FORCE HAS RECOMMENDED MORE THA
A DOZEN PREVENTATIVE SERVICES.
SCREENINGS FOR HIV, CERVICAL
CANCER AND OSTEOPOROSIS AS WEL
AS COUNCILING FOR OBESITY AN
TOBACCO USE.
PEOPLE WHO NEED PREVENTATIVE
SERVICES CAN NOW GET THEM WITHIN
THEIR INSURANCE NETWORKS FULLY
COVERED.
>> THE PREVENTATIVE SERVICE IS
SOMETHING THAT IS INTENDED T
KEEP SOMETHING BAD FRO
HAPPENING.
WHAT WE DO AS A TASK FORCE IS,
WE CAREFULLY EVALUATE TH
SCIENCE.
THE SCIENCE THAT TELLS U
WHETHER A PREVENTATIVE SERVICE
IS GOING TO BENEFIT PEOPLE
>> THE IDEA IS THAT PROVIDIN
PREVENTATIVE SERVICES FROM THE
OUTSET WILL SAVE LIVES AND
HEALTH CARE DOLLARS ON THE BAC
END.
>> ON THE SURFACE, PATIENTS AR
GOING TO GET ALL OF THE SERVICES
THAT THE TASK FORCE RECOMMENDS
EITHER A OR B COVERED IN FULL,
WITH NO CO PAYS.
THAT SOUNDS GOOD, I THINK TH
PROBLEM IS, THAT'S VERY EXPENS
EVERYONE
>> DR. SCOTT GOTTLIEB IS WITH
THINK TANK, IN THE MEDICAL
WORLD, NOTHING EVER COMES FO
FREE
>> FOR THE AVERAGE PERSON WH
HEARS THAT IT IS NOW THE LAW
THAT THEIR INSURANCE COMPANY HAS
TO PAY FOR PREVENTATIV
SERVICES
SEASON THE THAT SOMETHING PEOPLE
ARE GOING TO WANT AS PART OF
THEIR HEALTH BENEFITS?
>> I'M CONCERNED ABOUT THE
THINGS THAT WON'T BE COVERED
YOU'RE GOING TO SEE MORE THING
COVERED IN PULL THAT THE TAS
FORCE RECOMMENDS AND MORE THINGS
NOT COVERED THAT THE TASK FORC
DOESN'T RECOMMEND.
>> IF THE TASK FORCE SAY
INSURANCE COMPANIES HAVE TO PA
FOR SOMETHING, AND IT COSTS
LOT OF MONEY, AREN'T THEY JUST
GOING TO TAKE MONEY FROM OTHER
THINGS
>> THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT, WHAT
IT SAYS IS, THAT INSURANCE
COMPANIES HAVE TO PAY FOR A AN
B RECOMMENDATION
IT SAYS NO, SIR AT ALL ABOUT
WHAT DOESN'T GET PAID FOR.
THAT THEN REMAINS THE DECISION
OF INSURANCE COMPANIES, AND, O
COURSE, FOR MANY PEOPLE, IT'
THE DECISION OF MEDICARE
>> AND THE DECISION OF THE
INSURANCE COMPANIES LIKE AETNA
HAS BEEN TO STICK WITH WHAT TH
TASK FORCE SAYS.
DR. LONNIE REESE MAN IS IT
CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER.
>> WE'VE COVERED ALL THE
MANDATES ALREADY
THEY'RE BASED INTO OUR PREMIUM
AND WE'RE NOT EXPECTING
SIGNIFICANT INCREASE IN COSTS.
>> BUT THE REAL FINANCIA
CHALLENGE WILL BE TO MANAG
COSTS, AND AT THE SAME TIME,
SATISFY CUSTOMERS AS MOR
SERVICES ARE MANDATESED IN
COMING YEARS
>> ANY INCREASES IN COSTS WILL
BE COVERED IN OUR PREMIUMS, BU
WE WILL EXPLAIN THE BASIS FO
INCREASING PREMIUMS AS A RESUL
OF INCREASING MEDICAL COSTS.
>> THAT COULD MEAN NO OUT OF
POCKET EXPENSES FOR PREVENTATIVE
SERVICES AT THE DOCTOR'S OFFICE.
BUT HIGHER INSURANCE BILLS FOR
CONSUMERS.
AND THERE'S STILL ANOTHER ASPECT
OF THIS STORY.
WHETHER THERE'S THE SAME
OVERSIGHT OF THE VOLUNTEER TAS
FORCE AS THERE IS OF OTHER
GOVERNMENT AGENCIES.
>> I HAVE A PROBLEM WITH A
GOVERNMENT ENTITY FUNCTIONING AS
A REGULATORY AGENCY, NOT BEING
SUBJECT TO ANY OF THE RULES THAT
GOVERN GOOD REGULATION WRITING
OR RULE MAKING
THEY'RE GOING TO DETERMINE
COVERAGE NOT JUST FOR OBAM
CARE, NOT JUST FOR MEDICARE, BUT
FOR EVERYONE
>> CONTROVERSY ABOUT THE TAS
FORCE HAS BEEN ESPECIALLY HEATED
WHEN ITS DECISIONS HAVE BEEN
REVERSED OREGON AGAINST TH
GRAIN OF THE WIDER MEDICAL
COMMUNITY.
FOR INSTANCE, IN 2009, THE TAS
FORCE RECOMMENDED AGAINS
ROUTINE MAMMOGRAMS FOR WOMEN
BEFORE THE AGE OF 50
CHANGING AN EARLIE
RECOMMENDATION SAYING WOME
SHOULD BE SCREENED AT 40
DESPITE BEING MORE VISIBLE THESE
DAYS, THE CHAIR OF THE TAS
FORCE SAYS THEY'LL CONTINU
DOING THEIR JOB, REVIEWING
SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE SO THEY CA
KEEP AMERICANS HEALTHY
>> WE WANT TO BE INDEPENDENT AND
WE WANT OUR RECOMMENDATIONS TO
BE BASED ON SCIENCE, NOT
POLITICS
IF YOU LOOK AT OUR WEBSITE, IT
ENDS IN DOT ORG NOT DOT GOV.
WE'RE AN INDEPENDENT PANEL
WE'RE EPIDEMIOLOGISTS AN
PRIMARY CARE PHYSICIANS, NOT
POLICY MAKERS.
>> EVEN AS THE DEBATE OF THE
ROLE OF THE TASK FORCE
CONTINUES, EXPLORER BARBAR
HILLARY SAYS SHE'S JUST GRATEFUL
SHE GOT HER EARLY SCREENING.
>> TO ME, IT'S JUST SO OBVIOUS
THAT I WAS ABLE TO LIVE.
>> AS A RESULT -
>> AS A RESULT OF THE SCREENIN
PROGRAM.
LIVING IS NOT INHALING AND
EXHALING
LIVING IS, YOU KNOW YOU FEEL IT.
IF YOU DON'T FEEL IT, BABY, YO
AIN'T LIVING
>> VISIT NEWS HOUR.PBS.ORG T
FIND OUT WHAT PREVENTATIVE
SERVICES WILL BE COVERED BY YOUR
INSURANCE PROCEDURE UNDER TH
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT.
WATCH AN INTERVIEW WITH
PIONEER OF LUNG CANCER
SCREENINGS
>> THE OCTOBER ISSUE OF NATIONAL
GEOGRAPHIC FEATURES THE POWER OF
PHOTOGRAPHY, AND PEER FORTUNAT
TO BE JOINED BY ONE OF THE
PHOTOGRAPHERS OF NATIONA
GEOGRAPHIC
YOUR WORK ACCOMPANIES A PIEC
CALLED THE PRICE OF PRECIOUS
YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT CONFLIC
MINERALS IN THE CONGO.
WE'RE NOT JUST TALKING ABOUT
BLOOD DIAMONDS ANY MORE.
THAT'S SOMETHING PEOPLE WERE
FAMILIAR IS WITH MAYBE A DECAD
AGO.
WHAT KIND OF MINERALS?
>> IT'S MINERALS WE USE IN
ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS.
THINGS THAT MAKE OUR FACTORIES
FUNCTION MORE EFFICIENTLY.
THINGS THAT MAKE OUR CELL PHONES
WORK SILENTLY.
THINGS THAT KEEP THESE
ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS TOGETHER
>> TO HELP DRAW THAT CONNECTION,
HOW DOES MY PURCHASE OF AN
ELECTRONIC PRODUCT END UP MAKING
ITS WAY TO SOMEONE IN THES
MINES?
>> IN THE MINE, THEY EXTRACT
TIN, THAT PRODUCT THEN I
EXPORTED IN -- FROM CONGO TO ITS
NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES AND FROM
THERE IT MAKES ITS WAY TO TH
EAST AFRICAN COASTLINE SHIPPED
TO ASIA TO GO TO PRODUCTIO
COMPANIES, WHICH WILL TAKE THE
RAW MATERIAL AND TURN IT INTO
DIFFERENT FORM
>> HOW IS IT -- BY READING THI
PIECE, I LEARNED THAT THE CONG
IS ONE OF THE MOST MINERAL RIC
COUNTRIES ON THE PLANET.
YET AT THE SAME TIME, IT'S ONE
OF THE POOREST PLACES ON THE
PLANET
THEY HAVE THESE RESOURCES,
WHAT'S BEEN KEEPING THEM FRO
EXERCISING THAT SORT OF ECONOMIC
INDEPENDENCE
>> THE PROBLEM IS, THERE'S N
CONTROL.
23I6R9 OF ALL, WITHIN AN
ENVIRONMENT LIKE THAT, THE
GOVERNMENT THERE IS NOT REALLY
IN CONTROL OF THE REGIONS WHER
THE MINERALS ARE SOURCED
IF THEY ARE IN CONTROL, IT'S A
VERY MILITARY LED CONTROL.
SOME OF THE MILITARY LEADERS ARE
NOT AS SCRUPULOUS AS THEY SHOULD
BE, AND THEY'RE EXTRACTING THOSE
MINERALS FOR THEIR OWN PERSONA
PROFIT
ON TOP OF THAT YOU HAVE A HUGE
COLLECTION OF MILITIA REBE
GROUPS THAT ARE WORKING AN
FIGHTING IN THE REGIONS.
THEY USE THE NATURAL RESOURCES
TO FUND THE MILITARY CAMPAIGN.
THEY TRY TO TAKE OVER THE MINE
TO EXTRACT THE MINERALS.
>> ONE OF THE THINGS THAT IS
STRIKING ABOUT YOUR PHOTOS I
HOW MANY OF THESE MINES AR
STAFFED BY CHILDREN.
IS THERE ANY IMPROVEMENT
>> I HAVE SEEN SOME SMAL
IMPROVEMENT.
I'VE BEEN WORKING IN CONGO SINCE
THE LATE 1990s, AND WHEN I WAS
IN THESE MINES IN 2003, 2004
THERE WERE CERTAINLY A LOT MOR
CHILDREN IN THEM THAN I SA
RECENTLY
THAT'S NOT TO SAY THAT IT'S NO
A PROBLEM ANY MORE
IT IS A PROBLEM.
THERE'S STILL LOTS OF CHILDREN
WORKING IN THE MINES, BEIN
FORCED TO WORK IN TH
ENVIRONMENTS BY THE MILITARY
AND ALSO, SOMETIMES WHEN THE
FIGHTING STARTS AGAIN, THE
LEAVE THE MINES AND THEY'R
FORCED TO FIGHT FOR THE MILITIA,
THAT THEY ARE WORKING FOR IN THE
MINES.
>> THIS MAY SEEM LIKE A NAIV
QUESTION, BUT IS THERE ANYTHIN
THAT CAN BE DONE ABOUT IT?
HOW CAN AN AMERICAN CONSUMER
AFFECT WHAT'S HAPPENING SO A
CHILD IN A MINE IN THE CONGO
>> IT'S A REALLY GOOD QUESTION
BECAUSE THAT'S WHERE THE
SOLUTION LIES.
IT LIES WITH THE CONSUMER.
THE DODD FRANK BILL WAS PASSED
IN 2010, THAT MADE ANY COMPANY
RESPONSIBLE FOR REPORTING IF
THEY RECEIVED ANY MINERALS FRO
THE CONGO.
SOME OF THEM ARE WORKING BETTE
THAN OTHERS.
INTEL, MOTOROLA.
OTHER ELECTRONICS PRODUCTS
COMPANIES ARE NOT DOING SO WELL.
AND SO THEY NEED A PUSH.
AND THAT PUSH HAD TO COME FROM
US, THE CONSUMER
THEY CAN SEND MESSAGES TO TH
ORGANIZATIONS THAT ARE
MANUFACTURING THESE PRODUCTS T
TELL THEM, WE'RE WATCHING AN
SEEING WHAT YOU'RE DOING, YOU'RE
NOT BEHAVING IN A WAY YOU SHOULD
BE BEHAVING OR RESPONDING AS
QUICKLY AS YOU SHOULD BE
RESPONDING TO THE DODD-FRANK
ACT.
>> THANKS FOR YOUR TIME.
>> THANK YOU
>>> FINALLY TONIGHT, AN EXCERP
FROM A FRONT LINE DOCUMENTAR
AIRING THIS COMING TUESDAY, IT'S
ABOUT HEAD INJURIES IN THE
NATIONAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE, IN
THIS CASE, A CONCUSSION SUFFERED
BY FORMER DALLAS COWBOYS
QUARTERBACK, TROY AIKMAN DURIN
HIS TEAM'S VICTORY OVER THE SA
FRANCISCO 49ers IN THE NFC
CHAMPIONSHIP GAME.
>> I WENT TO VISIT TROY WHO WA
SITTING IN A DARKENED HOSPITAL
ROOM ALL ALONE
>> THE ROOM IS DARK BECAUS
AIKMAN CAN'T EVEN STAND LOOKIN
INTO THE LIGHT
YOU KNOW, IT'S A SURREAL SCENE
WHERE THE CITY IS CELEBRATIN
AND THE QUARTER BACK WHO WON THE
GAME IS IN THE HOSPITAL WITH HIS
AGENT.
>> HE LOOKED AT ME AND SAID,
LEE, WHERE AM I?
I SAID, WELL, YOU'RE IN TH
HOSPITAL
HE SAID, WELL, WHY AM I HERE
I SAID, BECAUSE YOU SUFFERED A
CONCUSSION TODAY
HE SAID, WELL, WHO DID WE PLAY
I SAID, THE 49ers.
AND HE SAID, DID WE WIN?
YES, YOU WON
DID I PLAY WELL?
>> YES, YOU PLAYED WELL.
DID -- WHAT DOES THAT -- AND SO,
WHAT DOES THAT MEAN?
>> IT MEANS YOU'RE GOING TO TH
SUPER BOWL
>> FIVE MINUTES LATER THEY'R
SITTING THERE, THEY'RE
CONTINUING TO HANG OUT, AN
AIKMAN TURNS SO STEINBERG AN
SAYS, WHAT AM I DOING HERE
AND THE NEXT THING YOU KNOW,
THEY ARE RELIEVING THI
CONVERSATION THEY HAD FIVE
MINUTES EARLIER.
>> FOR A MINUTE I THOUGHT HE WAS
JOKING
I WENT THROUGH THE SAM
CONSEQUENCE OF ANSWERS AGAIN
AND HIS FACE BRIGHTENED AND WE
CELEBRATED AGAIN
MAYBE TEN MINUTES PASSED AND H
LOOKED AT ME WITH THE SAME
PUZZLED EXPRESSION
AND ASKED THE SAME SEQUENCE OF
QUESTIONS.
>>> JOIN US TOMORROW ON AIR AN
ONLINE
FOREGOING A TRADITIONAL COLLEG
EDUCATION TO TAKE A CHANCE O
BECOMING THE NEXT GREAT TECH
ENTREPRENEUR
>> I REMEMBER MY FRESHMAN YEAR
SITTING IN MY ASTRONOMY CLAS
WITH SOME OTHER YOUNG ASPIRING
TECH ENTREPRENEUR WAS USING THAT
90 MINUTES TO FURTHER HIS CAREER
ABOUT.
>>> THE HOUSE VOTES UNANIMOUSL
FOR BACK PAY FOR FURLOUGHE
FEDERAL WORKERS.
THAT DOES IT FOR THIS EDITION.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
>>> PBS NEWS HOUR WEEKEND IS
MADE POSSIBLE BY LEWIS B. AN
LOUISE COLEMAN
JUDY AND JOSH WESTIN, JOYC
V.HALE
THE WALICK FAMILY.
THE CHERYL AND PHILLIP MIL
STEEN FAMILY
BERNARD AND EILEEN SCHWARTZ.
CORPORATE FUNDING IS PROVIDED BY
MUTUAL OF AMERICA.
THAT'S WHY WE'RE YOUR RETIREMENT
COMPANY.
ADDITIONAL SUPPORT IS PROVIDED
BY -
>> WE HEARD A LITTLE MOR
STUBBORN TONE FROM THE SPEAKER
IN THE PAST WEEK OR SO
WHAT'S BEHIND THAT
>> WELL, HE'S GOT TO BE RESOLUTE
>> WE'VE HEARD
UNTIL HE'S NOT
HE BASICALLY HAS TO BE RESOLUT
AND STUBBORN UNTIL IT'S TIME T
MAKE A BIG COMPROMISE.
A BIG TOUGH COMPROMISE
I THINK RIGHT NOW, HIS MAIN GOAL
IS TO KEEP HIS PARTY UNIFIED
AND THE BEST WAY TO KEEP HIS
PARTY UNIFIED IS TO HANG TOUGH
I THINK HE'S GOING TO HANG TOUGH
UNTIL HE FIGURES THE WAY OUT
AND I THINK HE HASN'T FIGURE
THAT OUT YET